I want to talk briefly about dates and
time in R, which is a
very, is a very special topic and could
require a lot more time.
And I have something I need to talk
a little bit about how R represents dates
and
times, and how you can use them in kind
of ara, arithmetic and data analysis types
of computations.
[NOISE] so R has a special way to
represent dates and times.
And they're, they're represented using
special data classes.
So, in the past,
we talked about different data types like
lists.
And character vectors.
And, numeric vectors, and so.
This is just another type of data on top
of those kinds of classes.
So dates are represented by the date
class.
and, times are represented by two separate
classes: the POSIXct and the POSIXlt
class.
So dates are basically.
Don't have times attached to them.
They represent a day, in a year
in a month.
And the, kind of, you can figure them in a
kind of a year, month, day format so for
example, this date is 1970, January 1st
and so
internally the dates are stored as the
number of days since 1970 January 1st.
That particular detail is not very
important but in case you're wondering
you don't know how they, how the, how R
actually does calculations
based on dates.
Times are stored internally as the number
of seconds.
Since 1970, January 1st.
And so, that's, again, another underlying
detail.
That's not very important, but it maybe
useful to know, sometimes.
So, the way dates in R, in R work, is you
can take a character screen.
Like this following 1970-01-01.
And convert it into a date, using as.Date
function.
That's probably the most common way that
you'll start
your, begin working with dates.
And, you'll notice that if you print out
this object.
You'll get something that looks like a
character string.
Now it's not actually a character string
but it will
print out that way because there's a
special print method.
Now if I unclass the object here you'll
see I get the number 0.
Remember?
Because the dates are stored internally as
the
number of days since 1970, January 1st and
since.
1970 January 1st.
0 days from that point.
You'll get 0.
If I.
If I input January 2, 1970, then you'll
see that underline is
represented as a number 1, because that's
1 day after 1970 January 1st.
If you had a.
If you had a date that was before
1970 Then, they'd be represented as
negative numbers.
so, but that's just for your little
background.
You don't, you don't have to worry about
the underlying representation.
Ultimately, what you need to know, is that
dates are stored
as objects of the date class.
Times, on the other hand, are represented
as two possible types.
One is called POSIXct and the other
POSIXlt.
So, POSIX is a family of computing
standards for how things should be
done on certain types of computers or how
data should be represented and
so there's a there's a family of standards
for how to represent dates
and times and pos and so POSIX a that's
part of the POSIX standard.
So [COUGH] in the POSIXct class.
Times are represented at just as very
large integers.
And so it's a useful type of class if you
want to say, store times in
a data frame or something like because
it's basically it's like a big integer
vector.
POSIXlt stores a time as a list.
underlying, and so, and it stores a bunch
of
other useful information about a given
time, for example what's
the day of the week of that time, what's
the the day of the year, the day of the
month, or the month itself.
And there are a number of generic
functions that operate on both dates and
times.
That you can use such as the, so the
weekdays functions tells you
what day of the week a given time is or a
given day is.
The month function tells you what month
that date or time is.
And the quarters functions gives you the
quarter number.
So for example, quarter Q1 would be
January through March, Q2 would be
April through June, etc.
like that.
So, these generic functions operate on, on
objects of class.
POSIXct or POSIXlt or date.
So, so, for example, you can, you can, you
can coerce things back and forth between
POSIXlt and POSIXct.
If you want, using the as.POSIXlt or the
as.POSIXct function.
so, for example the Sys.time function
here,
just gives you the current time.
As it's known by the system.
And you can see that when it prints out,
it prints out in a year month day format.
And then an hour minute second format.
And then the, the timezone, which is
Eastern Standard Time right now.
[COUGH] So you can convert this di to a
POSIXlt using pa, as.POSIXlt.
And, POSIXlt remember
underlying is a list.
So you can look at the names of the
elements.
In this list if you unclass it and you can
see that there's an element called seconds
that's the seconds
and the minutes the hours the M days the
day
of the month which in this case would be
23.
The month is just the month your in so
that's a January and then the year.
The weekdays or the day of the week.
The year, day, which is the day of the
year.
And then are we on daylight
savings or not?
[NOISE] So, if I extract the sec, seconds
element of this list, you'll see it's
11.86.
And so that, and so this actually gives
you the seconds in in fractional seconds.
So, it's 11 seconds and then .86 seconds.
So, that's, that's the number of seconds
in the time.
The POSIXct format you can see is you can
also get it from
the sys.time function and you can see that
if I un-class the POSIXct object.
I get this very large integer, because
that's
just the number of seconds since January
1, 1970.
Now if I try to apply the list operator,
the dollar sign to this object, you
see I get an error because objects of
POSIXct don't have these list elements in
them.
You want to get those list elements out
you
have to convert it to POSIXlt using the
as.POSIXlt function.
Then I can get the seconds out.
In this case it's 11.88 seconds.
So, finally there's a strptime function
which converts dates which
are written in character string format
into date or time objects.
Well, in this case it converts into two
time objects.
So and they use what are called format
strings.
So here I've got a string that says
January 10th, 2012 and then 10, 40
meaning hour 10 minute 40 and
then I have another string that said
December 9th 2012.
9, 10.
So if I want to convert these strings to
time objects I can use the strptime
function, what I do is I pass the
character vector and I pass it a format
string.
So in this case I got, and so you'll see
how these present signs fall by letters.
And then you can, you can look-up what
these symbols mean in the help page for
strptime.
So present B means the month.
In an abbreviate [UNKNOWN] name, %d is the
day.
Then comma and then %Y is the four-digit
year.
Then %H is the hour, sort of like colon
followed by %M which is the minute.
And so that's the format.
Of the, of the times here.
You can see that after I call [UNKNOWN] I
print out X, I get
these time objects that are formatted,
that
are printed out in the standard format.
When I look at the class of this object
you'll see it's in a POSIXlt format and so
that's the so you can look at so that's
the underlying kind of list format here.
Now I personally can never remember what
those formatting strings
are the %B ,%D, %Y I can never remember
what
those are and so I always have to look at
the help page for [UNKNOWN] to remember
what those details are.
Now, once you've got data in the date or
time format, you can, you
can do operations on them, which can be
very handy for example, you can you
can add and subtract dates, you can
compare dates, you can see is, is
one date less than another date or are
these two dates equal to each other?
So, but the end you need to be
careful that you can't always mix
different classes.
So for here, I have X which is a date
object, then Y which is a POSIXlt object.
If I try to subtract the two, you'll,
you'll get
an error because they're not the same,
type of object.
So I can, can, but if I convert the date
to a POSIXlt object so I can do as.POSIXlt
on it, then if I take the difference it'll
say
that the, the difference of 356.3 days
between the two.
The nice thing about the date and time
operators is that they keep track
of very tricky things like leap years,
leap seconds daylight savings and time
zones.
So just, this first example here, you can
see that so 2012,
it was a leap year and so there was a
February 29th.
And so the difference between March 1st
and February 28th is actually a difference
of two days, not a difference of one day
like it is every other year.
Similarly
I could take two times one which is in my,
X which is in my kind of
current time and then Y which is in the
time zone of GMT, so Greenwich Mean Time.
And take the difference between those.
So even though it looks like it should be
a 5-hour difference, it's
actually only a 1 hour difference because
of the change in the time zones.
So one of the advantages of using the date
time classes
is that it will automatically take care of
these kinds of irregularities.
So that was just a quick sum, kind of
overview
of the, the dates and the time classes in
R.
So just to summerize there are special
classes in R that will, that
represents dates and times that'll allow
you to do numerical and statistic
calculations.
dates, date, class, times use either the
POSIXct or POSIClt class.
And then character strings can be coerced
to either a date
or a time class, using the strptime
function or as.Date.as.POSIXlt, and
POSIX, as.POSIXct.
The other thing to note, that I haven't
really talked about here
is that a lot of the plotting functions,
will recognize date time objects.
So when you try to plot An object that,
that's a date time class.
It will recognize that object and then
format the X axis in
a special way so that it will have a time
element to it.
So you might want to try to experiment
with that a little bit to see how
plots change when you use a date time
class.